docs/troubleshooting.mdx, before:

---
title: Troubleshooting
---

import Image from '../components/image'

The following guides may help if you are having trouble using Conveyal. If you are still having problems, please email us at [support@conveyal.com](mailto:support@conveyal.com).

## Logging In

When using Conveyal, always navigate to [https://analysis.conveyal.com](https://analysis.conveyal.com) in your browser's address window. 

:::note
Bookmark [https://analysis.conveyal.com](https://analysis.conveyal.com) itself, do not bookmark the page with the login form or attempt to go to that login page directly. It may not work.
:::

If you are not logged in, the application should redirect you to a login page that looks like: 

<Image src='/img/login-page.png' alt='Log In Page' />

### Forgot password

If you've forgotten your password and would like to change it, first ensure that you have access to the email address associated with the account. Then, go to the application home page and:

1. If you are logged in, click `Log Out` at the bottom.
2. From the Log In form, click the `Don't remember your password?` link.
3. Enter the email address associated with your account. Click `Send Email`.
4. Follow the steps in the email (check spam folders if you do not see it), entering a new password for your account.
5. Go to the application home page and log in with the new password.

### Other issues

If you are seeing `Unauthorized` errors or you are unable to see data for your account then you may be attempting to access a resource that you don't have access to. Another possibility is your browser may be maintaing a session in another tab that has already timed out. 

Before contacting support, we recommend trying to log into Conveyal using private browsing or incognito mode. To enter a private browser session in your browser, follow the key combinations found [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Private_browsing#Support_in_popular_browsers). If you are still having trouble logging in while using a private browsing mode, please contact [support](mailto:support@conveyal.com).

## Server status

If you are having unexplained problems using our application, please check our [Status Page](https://analysis.conveyal.com/status) to verify that the issue is not stemming from connectivity or log in issues. The page should show two green `OK`s, without any error status bar:

<Image src='/img/status-page.png' alt='Status Page' />

Commit message:

add advice on fixing missing geometry

docs/troubleshooting.mdx, after:

---
title: Troubleshooting
---

import Image from '../components/image'

The following guides may help if you are having trouble using Conveyal. If you are still having problems, please email us at [support@conveyal.com](mailto:support@conveyal.com).

## Logging in

When using Conveyal, always navigate to [https://analysis.conveyal.com](https://analysis.conveyal.com) in your browser's address window. 

:::note
Bookmark [https://analysis.conveyal.com](https://analysis.conveyal.com) itself, do not bookmark the page with the login form or attempt to go to that login page directly. It may not work.
:::

If you are not logged in, the application should redirect you to a login page that looks like: 

<Image src='/img/login-page.png' alt='Log In Page' />

### Forgot password

If you've forgotten your password and would like to change it, first ensure that you have access to the email address associated with the account. Then, go to the application home page and:

1. If you are logged in, click `Log Out` at the bottom.
2. From the Log In form, click the `Don't remember your password?` link.
3. Enter the email address associated with your account. Click `Send Email`.
4. Follow the steps in the email (check spam folders if you do not see it), entering a new password for your account.
5. Go to the application home page and log in with the new password.

### Other issues

If you are seeing `Unauthorized` errors or you are unable to see data for your account then you may be attempting to access a resource that you don't have access to. Another possibility is your browser may be maintaing a session in another tab that has already timed out. 

Before contacting support, we recommend trying to log into Conveyal using private browsing or incognito mode. To enter a private browser session in your browser, follow the key combinations found [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Private_browsing#Support_in_popular_browsers). If you are still having trouble logging in while using a private browsing mode, please contact [support](mailto:support@conveyal.com).

## Server status

If you are having unexplained problems using our application, please check our [Status Page](https://analysis.conveyal.com/status) to verify that the issue is not stemming from connectivity or log in issues. The page should show two green `OK`s, without any error status bar:

<Image src='/img/status-page.png' alt='Status Page' />

## Problems with uploaded files

When uploading spatial data layers or transportation network data, Conveyal will scan for conditions that make 
the data suspect, invalid, or ambiguous. Some of these conditions are classified as errors and will make the data set
invalid and unusable, while others are treated as informational warnings and the data set will remain usable. 
This section explains how to interpret and resolve specific errors and warnings users have experienced on their
uploaded files.

### Missing geometry

When uploading a shapefile, you may see an error like `Null (missing) geometry on feature: grid.461`. It is possible
for programs to produce shapefiles containing one or more "features" (database rows with attributes such as job counts 
or census block IDs) that are not associated with a point, line, or polygon (a "geometry"). 
This implies something went wrong in creating or exporting the shapefile. You will need to 
examine and repair it in GIS software such as QGIS. Once the shapefile has been added to a QGIS project as a layer, you 
can open the attribute table of that layer, click the tool button to "select features using an expression", enter the
expression `$geometry is NULL` and click "select features". The selected features will not appear on the map (as they
have no associated geometry) but back in the attribute table you can choose "show selected features" to narrow the list
down to the offending features. Based on their other attributes you can determine whether something went wrong in the 
export process. If these features are spurious you can toggle editing and delete them, creating a shapefile without
this problem that can be uploaded to Conveyal.
